okay so continuing yeah my son Christopher my son Christopher in school he played rugby and he was the winger and I know he came home and he was so excited he said to me he had a try I didn't have a clue I said well try harder next time
I didn't really cement him. So culture on both sides. Then he was saying his friend you know each day he laughed they've had a bit of ear missing something happened you know to them and I thought it was a dangerous game here and when he was
chosen to go abroad you know to America I said no you're not going because what I said no you've been telling me the injuries they've been having you're not going definitely not then he says to me look you missed my chance I could
have been a millionaire something like that now thanks to you you spoke my chances now that's what he used to say to me I said yes you might not have your ear missing all this I used to say to him
and also and culture got a lot because my father the attitude lot was the boys had to work and things like that so I had a bit of my parents attitude because my daughter apparently she's done very
well in Sweden well I know she passed all levels and things like that but how well you know I could have pushed her on you know to go to I didn't know about going to you know the university or like during school they have like
I never knew about that so you know since they were in school you know because my parents never once came to parents meeting anything like that
so you basically you only knew what you experienced with our experience and you put on to you as a girl with mine then he went to um always racism in school my son and I remember when he was little
junior where he let say I live here in the school was like just down the crossroad and I walked through and he be I could see him outside you know standing by the door so I asked him what are you doing out there the teacher
I said what for he said because then he has to go to toilet and they won't let him go that's told him if you want to go to it should done it in break time and that he read himself and they kept him so went to school and I complained to the headmaster about it and I wanted to see her so with her with his teacher me and the headmaster so I said to him I asked my son and he told me that you will say to him that I am going to go to the toilet.
They were not just him the whole class you got to if you want to go to it go at break time but then you know the little boys you know the boys like to play first and they come in and she was just punishing him you know and make him wet himself and keep him there she do it all the time.
He was powerful so I said to him I asked my son and he told me exactly what happened I said you know and I know my son knocked on the door and said my son wouldn't do this or do that I said you know him and he wouldn't tell lies I said but you seem to be the type of person you are very quick to push it put a child down and make them out to be the liar and then headmaster went ladies ladies please let's not antagonize one another you know at that time.
I noticed it then but then when he went on to the but what they do in school they put on a report on the child then to make the which was put on a terrible report on him because we went to their school then the teacher he had was awful he wasn't being taught English I can't remember how I found out but then I I found the school I went up to see the headmaster as it happened I knew the headmaster because he attended the same church in the same church.
So I said to him I kept on phoning him but I didn't get nowhere they were actually putting him right in when I put him right in I had to reply the following they asked me to come in and then he said to me I said she's refusing to teach him English.
I asked her why her excuse was someone like your son he's very good at maths when they go to maths they're no good at English I said that's the reason if he's been coming to school is to learn isn't it and the headmaster said don't worry missus has to leave it with me but what she did because he insisted she had to she had to teach him she went off sick rather than teach him.
But he said don't worry about him I'll make sure you'll be okay but he did make sure he was okay.
He sent him a program which he passed and sent him to college and when he went to college they gave him a program he passed put him through to university then you know so he kept his words out there.
He was terrible the school racist then so when I met this chap I told him he came to me he was from Africa and I said to him about in Newport they're very racist there's no teachers there black teachers so I said to him because he took over there's a place called Jim GEMS.
He said I can't grant minority support or something like that he was first of his kind in Newport I said well you've got the building I said if you can train if I get a group of people together get something to train them up to a level then go to school and teach.
So he said right he said well I'll do I'll apply to the European for funding and I've got the space there and you just bring me the people so I did I got quite a few about 12 Caribbean people I was one and we taught English she got someone from London she was excellent and they was Caribbean.
She was excellent teacher she really was she went through everything and she was so patient if you want to help with anything you know don't be afraid to ask you know but she got us through it and while she taught us when we did it then we had to go into various schools colleges as well.
And we'd be assessed by it and marked as well by the teachers so we done all that we all passed but then while we're doing it as well well I found it but the Asian was coming then and in the schools now you find the more Asians now rather than it was taught English as a second language because I explained.
As Caribbean even though you speak English is like pigeon English you know and when you're writing the grammar is not the same it is not whereas you know with the Asian they're going to school they get the help I want to win that's why they do better than this.
And there was a server came around do we need that extra help and I said yes we needed it and I've booked in the community and there was the other ones no we speak English and all the old it's ridiculous they poo poo it and so that went by the wayside.
Because I.
But they do need you know what they definitely need definitely.
The extra support they do yeah because you when you're writing doesn't flow so easy and then get your thoughts into chronic or the like you do need that support definitely.
How important is it do you think for the next generation to hear and to know the stories of people like you and your parents and that kind of thing.
I think it's very important to the top of definitely and I think they definitely that support in school as well they really do because it will help a lot that support you know in the region the writing.
Why is it important.
It's important for them to achieve later on you know in their adult to get good jobs you know and to be able to express themselves you know.
Be their own voice as well they need a voice don't they.
And they need someone to look up to as well in school and so there's no one they can look up to and who's a voice for them within the community.
There's nothing here in Newport nothing at all you know where they can go and meet and support it's like for instance being ill as well there's no.
There's nothing like within the in they've all got that support you know.
They need a bit them they link need to go back as far as their country as well I think with their high commission them supporting them over here.
Link it up.
That's a good thing.
Because with the Asian as well when they buy all this property they link it up with their government.
So they link to the government back home and everything.
Is there any other thing you'd like to say about.
Britain about being British about feeling British or not feeling British do you feel more British or more Caribbean.
The both.
So you describe yourself as what.
Ethnicity wise.
I would say black British.
No matter where I go I'm open my mouth.
Oh you're from Wales tell you're from Calif I was in St. Kitts as well.
And this white girl came up to me she said to me and how well do the people how do they accept you here.
And I'm saying kids with your accent as a what the speaking person they always say that to me always on the train you know they got all your go Shalibasi.
That's what they always say.
Moment I open my mouth.
Do you feel more Welsh or more British.
Do you think there's a difference between being Welsh and being British.
About a very racist.
Very very racist.
But I.
It's only now and all I realize because we're the younger I went to my friend's house before.
And she didn't let me know you know it won't be me anywhere.
I said why haven't you invited me.
I invited straight away but she didn't know schools until it wasn't she wouldn't let to invite me and I realized then.
I didn't have the time zone later on when you're growing up you realize these things.
They didn't want to let me in.
They didn't want you around.
And I realized growing up that racism is not in the school.
I define the mixture it starts within the home without that's a hundred percent the parents you know.
Is there any hope is there anything we can do about that.
I think they see.
In the school is all just.
In the white faces of the mixture.
That would help as well because when I was teaching the school as well.
I couldn't believe it.
The teacher was doing something.
She used the letter N.
She chose a letter to the class names of the beginning with N.
And they went.
I was so I couldn't believe it.
But the teacher didn't blink.
She acted with the children acted with something normal.
So obviously something it was terrible.
So I came back and went to I reported them.
But they were worried because this chap came to see me which from the council.
He said to me they're worried that you might take it further and all this.
I said I'm not worried.
Because this chap came to see me which from the council.
He said to me they're worried that you might take it further and all this.
I said I got no intention of taking it further.
The person what I want.
I'd like it to go.
I'd like it to go on a course.
You know.
And I'd like to be around to make sure she did go on that.
But they said I couldn't be there and all this nonsense.
It was gems.
I don't know.
But then then because that happened there was this what did they wear.
It was in school.
There was this blonde girl with blue eyes.
She cut it's my it was my husband niece looks call me Antigua.
They didn't realize we were related.
So she started picking that she said oh she's.
She seems to be tired in school.
Do you think she's you know getting me to be negative but I just ignored her.
Because in the school.
During the breaks they.
They talk so they talk about each child.
Like I remember this little boy this mixed race boy and he was very bright and clever.
And because he was mixed race they would always put him down in there.
And kept him down.
So it's got a lot to do with them.
With them.
Is your background I think like and the judge you in school that he the judge you a lot.
I know what to say.
It seems that if you are a person of color.
If you're non white that.
The system is already gay against you so to make it.
You have to work extra hard I guess.
Is to the mentality.
It's like it's institutionalized isn't it.
In all these.
When.
I will leave you to have your lunch.
And I think I think this is how that feels.
Do you say anything else you want to say.
Oh please don't forget to get in touch with them.
The.
Embassy first say in case the high commissioner with the flag please sink it.
Because if I have the flag to go against you know my father you know my mother.
I'm saying kiss me my mother's from sink it as well.
I don't play on.
The French room.
I was very so good the chop I did it with.
He he he was a Jamaican chap he'd never when he came over here.
He didn't know about the French room because he came over late he came over.
The late 60s and he never even had a French we never even owned this house.
So everything what I told him is what I did and the names of my sisters as well.
Okay.
We wrote it together but he took it away.
We wrote it together but he took it all into.
Oh I was so annoyed when but I thought.
You get.
Do you do you have any of those things still like.
Ground and all those kinds of things do you own anything.
I never ever had no I wouldn't want anything like that.